notes/todo.md, before:

- [ ] finding recombinant reads

    - [ ] viterbi algorithm
        - [x] generate data on the basis of given probabilities
        - [ ] understand viterbi script deeply
        - [x] make predictions on that data

    - [x] test on Aionostat data
        - [x] clones
            - [x] extract evidences from a clone sequence
            - [x] make a prediction with the viterbi algorithm
        - [x] reads
            - [x] extract evidences from a read
            - [x] make a prediction with the viterbi algorithm

    - [ ] parameter estimation
        - [ ] emission probabilities
            - [x] reads (analyse the reads of pure phages sequenced, infer the probabilities corresponding to each hidden state)
                - [x] build the msa of each read with the references and keep track of the frequency of evidences
            - [ ] clones
        - [ ] transition probabilities
            - [ ] maximum likelihood

    - [x] alignment between references
        - [x] snps and indels frequency

    - [x] gaps
        - [x] what happens if we don't consider gaps
        - [x] what happens if we consider gaps
        - [x] what is the best option?

    - [ ] running on the whole dataset
        - [ ] script to build msa of each read with references and analyse it
            - [x] map the reference index to the msa index
            - [x] cut the msa
            - [x] add the read to the msa
            - [ ] we are using the fastest msa method possible. are we making a lot of error?
            - [ ] we are letting MAFFT trim the reads to keep the length of the cut alignment the same. are we trimming a lot?
        - [ ] make the algorithm faster
            - [] hybrid reference approach
                - [] create the hybrid reference
                - [] align the reads to the hybrid reference
            - [] set up a comparison framework between mafft method and fast method
                - [] create a subset of 100 reads on which to test the methods
        - [ ] extract and store the recombination data
            - [ ] position of recombination on the reference genome

- [ ] representing whole-population recombination data

Commit message:

run on whole dataset completed

notes/todo.md, after:

- [ ] finding recombinant reads

    - [ ] viterbi algorithm
        - [x] generate data on the basis of given probabilities
        - [ ] understand viterbi script deeply
        - [x] make predictions on that data

    - [x] test on Aionostat data
        - [x] clones
            - [x] extract evidences from a clone sequence
            - [x] make a prediction with the viterbi algorithm
        - [x] reads
            - [x] extract evidences from a read
            - [x] make a prediction with the viterbi algorithm

    - [ ] parameter estimation
        - [ ] emission probabilities
            - [x] reads (analyse the reads of pure phages sequenced, infer the probabilities corresponding to each hidden state)
                - [x] build the msa of each read with the references and keep track of the frequency of evidences
            - [ ] clones
        - [ ] transition probabilities
            - [ ] maximum likelihood

    - [x] alignment between references
        - [x] snps and indels frequency

    - [x] gaps
        - [x] what happens if we don't consider gaps
        - [x] what happens if we consider gaps
        - [x] what is the best option? do not consider gaps

    - [ ] running on the whole dataset
        - [ ] script to build msa of each read with references and analyse it
            - [x] map the reference index to the msa index
            - [x] cut the msa
            - [x] add the read to the msa
            - [ ] we are using the fastest msa method possible. are we making a lot of error?
            - [ ] we are letting MAFFT trim the reads to keep the length of the cut alignment the same. are we trimming a lot?
        - [ ] make the algorithm faster
            - [x] hybrid reference approach
                - [x] create the hybrid reference
                - [x] align the reads to the hybrid reference
                - [x] build the msa starting from minimap alignment (use method .get_aligned_pairs())
                - [x] extract the evidences with the msa and make the prediction with the viterbi algorithm
            - [x] set up a comparison framework between mafft method and fast method
                - [x] create a subset of 100 reads on which to test the methods
                    - [x] reads
                    - [x] parameter estimation
                - [x] run the two methods on the test set and see the differences
                    - [x] reads
                    - [x] parameter estimation
            - [ ] run on the whole dataset
                - [x] reads
                    - [x] set up a read_length threshold to make the algorithm faster
                - [ ] parameter estimation
        - [x] extract and store the recombination data
            - [x] array with position of recombination events in the reference genome
            - [x] plot the whole genome recombination

- [ ] representing whole-population recombination data
